---
title: "Visiting Clapham South: Deep Level Shelter"
published: 2017-11-27 21-35-27 +00:00
tags: photography hidden-london london-transport-museum
---

A couple of weeks ago, I joined a Hidden London tour down into the tunnels
under Clapham South tube station. They have a fascinating and much longer than
you'd ever expect history.

As the Blitz started [in date], the Government realised how little shelter was
available to the citizens of London and so commissioned a team at the London
Passenger Transport Board (LPTB) to explore the idea of building a set of
deep-level shelters.

The LPTB had already been investigating a solution to state of overcrowding on
the (now) [really?] Northern and Central lines. They'd been putting together
plans to build a "London Express Railway", with trains more to the size of a
surface railway that'd run under the Northern line.

This explains the position of a total of [how many?] deep-level shelters which
were planned nearby to the existing Northern line. And also how they could put
the scheme together so fast.

Construction of Clapham South started on [date] and was completed on [date].
The tunnel linings were build with left-overs of the 1920 London Electric
Railway (the modern day [which?]) and LPTB linings from the Central line (it
was a war, after all). You can see their relevant logos on some of the linings
today. Part-way through construction, concrete linings were switched to. These
seemed to be holding up much better than the metal ones.

During the war they were little used until towards the end and the start of the
V1 and then V2 bombing campaigns.

Due to post-war austerity (and the growth of the car), London Transport
switched their focus to rebuilding the network and then building new lines.

Instead, the facility turned into peace-time accommodation that helped London
become the place it is today. Right after the war, it continued to provide
basic accommodation for people who's homes were bombed out (up until 1946).

The most interesting inhabitants though were from the MV Empire Windrush. Being
used as a troop ship, docked in Jamaica in 1948 with the intention of picking
up servicemen who'd been on leave. Instead of leaving mostly empty, an advert
was placed in local newspapers offering cheap transport to the UK. This was a
world where the British Nationality Act had just passed, which had granted
citizenship to members of the colonies (and many years before any immigration
acts). When these people arrived, it wasn't quite clear where they'd stay and
so the tunnels were used for this purpose. The local labour office was in
Coldharbour Lane, where many of the inhabitants went to find work. This was the
beginning of the Caribbean community in Brixton.

In 1951, it was used as a rudimentary hotel for the Festival of Britain. Then
as cheap accommodation for visiting Scout groups and various groups of troops
over the years.

The tunnels stopped being used for accommodation when some US troops (at Goodge
St) caused a fire by using lighters for graffiti. Then they started being used
for long-term document storage.

Owned by the Government until 1998, they were divested and sold to Transport
for London. They continued to lease them out commercially.

Today, it has a 25 year lease by the London Transport Museum and has a Grade 2
listing (because it has the original bunks and other features). They plan to
develop a much greater tour and are currently looking to reopen an entrance on
Clapham Common itself which can provide a more accessible visitors centre.

Finally, a fun little discovery I had at the end: The good lift is the original
and the guide I spoke with was once stuck in it for four hours! Apparently it
rattles _a lot_.
